hi guys this is going to be a very quick
presentation on applying spaced
repetition to mathematics
it's actually going to be a summary of a
talk that was given by paul robert show
on the 20th of february 2021 in the
supermemory.wiki discord
if this sort of talk sounds interesting
to you you should definitely check out
the supermemory.wiki discord there will
be a link in the description
so essentially the purpose of this
presentation is to ensure that this
knowledge doesn't get lost
because the talk with paul was excellent
but unfortunately it couldn't be
recorded
so uh hopefully this will let people who
weren't able to attend the talk
get some of the insights that those who
were able to attend the talk got
and also a second hope is that it will
encourage paul to perhaps crystallize
his thoughts into an article or a video
because i think there's huge demand for
this sort of information
so a summary of paul is that he is a
french quantum physicist
and he has been using srs specifically
memozyne
for an exceptionally long period of time
around six years now
and he has over 25 000 math cards so
paul spends around uh two to three hours
per day
on memozyne and that's composed of both
doing his repetitions
as well as reformulating old cards and
making connections between old cards
one thing he said that was very
interesting is that during that period
he hasn't actually taken a break
because it's too fun for him so he
really enjoys actually the process of
reviewing and reformulating these cards
in space repetition system
and in terms of benefits he noted that
he has
theorems and proofs at the tip of his
fingers which i really liked
paul has a very simple set of core
principles for applying space repetition
to mathematics and can be summarized
very simply as
the 20 rules apply to math 2. if you're
not familiar with the 20 rules paul is
referring to
the 20 rules of knowledge formulation by
piotr wozniak
which was created in 1999 many people
have the misconception that
the 20 rules of formulating knowledge
and srs in general cannot be applied to
mathematics they seem to think that
mathematics is
special or somehow different from other
domains of knowledge
paul reiterated many times that this is
not the case and that in his experience
at least
the 20 rules of knowledge formulation
can be applied very successfully to
mathematics
he did note that he made many
formulation errors at the beginning when
he was just beginning to apply
space repetition to math but he's slowly
improved over time
and he is still discovering new
principles for math items
so the number one takeaway rayleigh ron
paul's talk was that knowledge can be
retained
using space repetition math knowledge is
a kind of knowledge
and therefore math knowledge can be
retained using space repetition
so one of the things that paul stressed
throughout his talk was the importance
of atomicity when you're creating math
cards
atomicity is one of the basic 20 rules
of formulating knowledge
it basically means that you shouldn't
add unnecessary information to your
cards you should try and keep them as
concise as possible
since it's much easier to retain the
knowledge contained within
shorter cards to give you an example
paul does not use
long proofs they tended to be around
six to eight lines maximum and in each
closed card for example he would only
close one line of the proof
which represents a simple atomic thought
by doing this he's able to keep the time
per card at
just slightly higher than for like a
vocabulary card for learning a foreign
language
which is very important when you have
lots of cards you don't want the
time per card to start rising much
beyond that because it'll become very
taxing to review many cards
one extension paul makes to the 20 rules
in terms of item formulation
is that he encourages people to
recursively decompose
long proofs into sub-proofs and
sub-proofs of sub-proofs and so on
this is based on the principle of
atomicity that you should try and reduce
the amount of
unnecessary information contained within
each proof
and paul mentioned that this idea
originally came from a paper by leslie
lampot
called how to write approve one benefit
of recursively decomposing proofs into
sub-proofs
is that this facilitates um proof reuse
by which i mean you are able to reuse
the atomized subproofs in new proofs
this creates sort of a web of
interconnected math knowledge in your
collection
paul also mentioned the importance of
striving for abstraction he specifically
mentioned that we should aim for
as much abstraction as possible in our
proofs
and we should incrementally reformulate
our proofs over time
in order to gradually climb the ladder
of abstraction
and the whole idea behind striving for
abstraction is that
abstraction maximizes the applicability
of the knowledge that we're encoding
inside the space repetition system while
paul uses supermemo
for other sorts of knowledge such as for
learning about stoicism
he recommends using anki or memzine for
learning about math
because both of those programs have good
support for latex
and it's important to use latex so you
can
incrementally reformulate your cards
over time
another benefit of anki and memozine is
that if you make an edit
to a parent note the edits that you make
will propagate to the child closes
which is a very efficient way to
batch edit a bunch of cards
related to reformulation paul also
mentioned the importance of
rewriting proofs you should rewrite
proofs in your own terms
proofs and books tend to be
self-contained and they assume no
knowledge of other branches of math
you actually want to rewrite your proofs
so that they do
take into account all of your prior
knowledge because this will help create
that sort of web of interconnected math
knowledge
paul also noted that as you make more
links your knowledge tends to get
simpler rather than more complex as
people might imagine
he also stressed the importance of
creating your own math symbols
sort of your own language for different
disciplines of math
because in mathematics there's no
standardized
language for each branch and you're
going to have to avoid
overlaps and interference between
different branches and between your
cards
i asked paul about the common
refactoring patterns that he's noticed
himself using
over his time using space repetition for
mathematics
and he said that as a beginner he would
often create cards that were way too
long
if we take a look at the example again
he's creating
these proof cards with only six to eight
lines of proof
and uh for each closed card he's only
closing one line of the proof
and he stressed that as being extremely
important especially as a beginner
now he's been using uh space repetition
for mathematics for a while
he's noticed that the refactorings are
more semantic
rather than syntactic he's not so much
making the beginner mistake of making
cards that are way too long
instead his reformulations focus on
adding new conceptions
new abstractions and new connections
between new knowledge and his prior
knowledge
paul's motivations for learning math
include finding new connections
pure curiosity and of course his
academic research
he noted something very very interesting
which was that 50
of his new cards are actually based on
connections from his old knowledge
so it's as if his old knowledge is just
generating new knowledge automatically
for him
so finally paul gave some advice on how
to actually start learning math with srs
as a beginner
first he recommended that everyone
should read about srs item formulation
um a good uh often recommended article
to read is the
20 rules of item formulation by piotr
wozniak
then you should go and read about
lamport's recursive proof strategy
because that's very important for
decomposing proofs into sub-proofs and
maintaining the atomicity of your math
cards
then you should start with a branch of
math that actually interests you be
guided by your learn drive and just pick
something that's
interesting to you personally then as
you see gaps in your knowledge you can
fill them as you go
and at some point you may actually
prefer wikipedia where you can have the
html links between pages
over books so that's the end of the
presentation i hope this was useful i
hope this can
persist this amazing knowledge that we
learned from paul over time
and i hope this also encourages paul to
create
some articles or perhaps a video on his
experience
learning math using space repetition